---
layout: page
title: Rock Defomation and Structures IV
subtitle: Uttrakhand Open University, Haldwani
bigimg: /img/RDSIV.jpg
author: santanu
---
<button type="button" class="btn btn-default"><a href="/rds/gallery/rds4">View Gallery</a></button>

The Structural Geology & Tectonic Studies Group, India (SGTSGI) completed its seventh year with the conclusion of fourth “Rock Deformation and Structure” (RDS IV) conference held at the School of Sciences, Uttarakhand Open University, Haldwani from 18 – 20 November, 2016. SGTSGI is organizing this conference once in every two years since 2010. Prof. P.D. Pant, Director (I/C), School of Sciences of Uttarakhand Open University convened the RDS-IV. The conference was financially supported jointly by Department of Science and Technology, Government of Uttrakhand and Uttarakhand Open University. 

The abstract volume of RDS-IV comprised 59 abstracts and 42 scientists from all over the country participated in the conference. Oral and poster presentations were made on four focal themes. 17 oral and 26 Poster presentations were arranged on 18th and 19th November 2016, including three Key Note Talks focusing on the theme of the session. The final day  of the conference (20th November 2016) was dedicated for field trip. Each oral session ended with detailed discussion on the theme.  Four themes are: (1) Tectonics of Fold and Thrust belts, (2) Field analysis of deformation structure and Fluid-Rock interaction, (3) Shear Zones and Deformation mechanism, and (iv) Neotectonics and Crustal uplift. Keeping with the the motivation of RDS, poster sessions were given more importance in order to have a platform for detailed scientific discussion between the young participants and the senior researchers. At the end of second day, a Group Discussion was organized where discussion was primarily focused on the activities of SGTSGI in time period between RDS IV and RDS V. It was agreed that under the aegis of SGTSGI, some field and classroom workshops will be carried out, focusing on research scholars and students. In fact, we also discussed on some probable venues and organizers for such workshops. For example, a 10 days field trip was proposed in and around Ghatsila-Galudih area and Dr. Santanu Bose and Prof. Nibir Mandal agreed to organize this Field workshop; Dr. Santanu Misra accepted to organize a classroom workshop on theoretical aspects of Structural Geology in IIT, Kanpur and Dr. Achyuta Ayan Misra of Reliance Industries agreed to convene one workshop on Seismic profiles. One important issue discussed in this meeting concerning the modality of the next RDS V. Members present in the meeting emphasized on DISCUSSION MODE on a particular theme/topic, where number of oral presentation will be kept at a minimum, in contrast to many  conventional conferences. In fact, SGTSGI always give more importance to POSTER PRESENTATIONs to have a better scientific interaction. The second day of RDS IV ended, confirming the name of the host institution for the next conference in this series (RDS V). Prof. Anupam Chattopadhyay will organize RDS V in 2018 at the Department of Geology of University of Delhi.

The third day of the conference was dedicated for a day-long field trip along Haldwani –Kathgudam section of frontal Himalayan belt. Prof. P.D. Pant and Mr. Mohit Puniya conducted the field trip for 29 participants, where they introduced the participants to the classic section of Main Boundary Thrust (MBT) zone near Amritpur. The trip was very educative, and was enjoyed and appreciated by all participants. 